# 2021/04/11 - Poor man's Spritely

![man holding a bulb](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1474631245212-32dc3c8310c6?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=MXwxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHw%3D&auto=format&fit=crop&w=1024&q=80)

This is far away from a complete or fair review of
[Spritely](https://spritelyproject.org/). I took those notes while
reading the documentation trying to tie what I read with what I
already know or imagine. Take everything written here with grain of
salt. Prolly, mistakes are my own deed, since I describe a machinery
with similar goals such as a less centralized Web *ahem* Internet, but
not necessarly the same goals since me, myself and I want to break
free from the web-stack, and the world-wide-web, which I understand is
different from Christopher Lemmer Webber idea.

Regarding this wanna-be anti-web thing I just mentioned, it may become
apparant after reading the next paragraphs that I may or may not be an
anarchist, against the state, anti-conformist, and against any form of
hierarchy, and what not. I may or may not be an anarchist, that is not
the point of this discussion (and arguably I know too little about
Anarchy to be able to claim that myself). My claim is the following:

> The world may possibly function better with another model of
> organisation.

For some definition of better. That does not means I want to go paleo!
To speak startup language that is my way to think
outside-of-the-box. I do not explore ideas mindlessly, and obviously I
have an agenda, which boils down to make my life easier.

By the way, I think the thing dubbed "Conway Law" looks more like a
curse! It is not a law of Physic, it is more like someone hot-take
that arguably happens a lot. And that is one of the driving idea of my
work: we should not repeat big or small ideas without thinking about
them because this is the case since the dawn of times. And one of that
idea that we keep perpetuating is the star-system, I call it also the
megapolis syndrom, prolly easier to understand: "where is my thought
leader?". It also ends up becoming stockholm syndrom when, in fact,
the guru is a sociopate.

You might also think: "We can not solve a social problem, with a
technical solution". To that I respond that it is what Humanity has
been doing for several tousands of years such as the invention of
fire! You would be right about the fact that a technical achievement
of any sort, requires some collective "prise de conscience"
acknowledgment (sufficent but not necessary!) before it can remotely
start to put into motion the possibly deep change that said new
software entails. An idea linked to the previous one that is mentioned
in [What is
CapTP](https://spritelyproject.org/news/what-is-captp.html), rephrased
and made my own: we do not understand, what we can not see. So, there
is clearly a chickend-and-egg problem here: we do not change the
world, because the world must change itself... or even better: we can
not comprehend change, because there is no existing alternatives!

Exploring alternatives is exactly the idea I want to seed with
[awesome-civkit](https://github.com/amirouche/awesome-civkit/).  I
will be bold about it this time: we need to shoot for the stars, and
not let whatever billionaires drive Earth revolution around.

Yes, it is difficult.

First let's be clear, Spritely is not yet finished, even if they are
great demos such as a terminal-phase space shooter (!) or goblin-chat
over tor, there is still much to build. I do not write that to
diminish the work of [Christopher Lemmer
Webber](https://dustycloud.org/) at all. I write to say: it is not
there yet.  And given my own experience trying to build a community
around new ideas such as [http://peacesear.ch](http://peacesear.ch), I
know first hand that it is not easy at all even with big chunks of
code, working demos, past success etc...

If I write today, as usual, it is mainly to set my ideas straight, and
possibly help you by helping myself.

I can not yet contribute directly monkey-coder "main d'oeuvre" because
I do not know the theory of [E language](www.erights.org/). I read
some wikipedia pages such as [Object-capability
model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object-capability_model), and
tried myself to think about how to ease sharing, the exchange of
ideas, how to empower the users with more literacy, and tools to
achieve their goals.

One of the answer to that is inside Babelia, the search engine.

Search engines are the collective bus stop of every single Internet
user. Democratizing that tool, like it was done before with steam
power locomotive or even cinema that eventually lead to the
establisment of Hollywood, has the potential not only to spur new
ideas, and since "execution is everything" lead to new tools. By the
way, I do not claim that Babelia will be the ONE, but certainly it
will help the idea, like they were dozens of wikis before wikipedia
that paved the way for wikipedia success, and without which wikipedia
would not be part of world heritage. I hope one day, wikipedia will go
back in the shadow, like the rest of the world wide web, replaced by
something better. Something that is better fit to collective
ownership. We are not there yet, but we are working on it.

Babelia is meant to bridge the web with the next generation Internet.

The plan is not to destroy the World Wide Web, but more along the line
of offering a smooth path to slowly move to a new paradigm, where
users own their data, and in practice to do need to login or forcebly
accept cookies everytime they look inside an art gallery, or museum,
or library. And in particular, in that new paradigm that I dream of, I
do not exclude money! Actually, I do not know a path toward the
annihilation of money. So, go away with your meme such as: "How will
feed my family", "There is no commercial application", "We go back to
trade vegetables" et al. I mean, money may or may not have its place
in perfect world... The proof of the pudding is in the eating: it can
accomodate most systems to itself. Still, Money is apparantly
sufficient for a working system. I do not know if money is necessary.

In this new paradigm I am thinking about, and started building,
Babelia bridge the old and the wanna-be new. The new paradigm should:

- empower users
- ease exchange of ideas, and knowledge
- offer similar, or better experience
- not loose in terms of possible features

Toward those goals, I choosed the following more technical features:

- Decentralized / publicly distributed
- Whole stack Scheme
- A framework comprehensible by a single individual

I end up with with Scheme as my working programming language because
Scheme makes everything look easy, and impossible thing:
possible. That would require even more writing one day. In anycase,
one thing is sure is that it should be portable to other programming
language, so I will NOT forbid ports to other programming
languages. Who knows, maybe there is better than Scheme :)

Because a software without data is not as useful as software with
data, i looked at ideas how to build a distributed database. And got
inspiration from the Distributed Hash Table (DHT). I discovered a DHT
could work a publicly accessible database. I put aside the blockchain,
because so far it is too much resource hungry, and does not scale as
well as the DHT. Mind the fact that they are meant for different use
cases also. So far, Babelia roadmap does not include bitcoins stuff or
related.

Starting with the DHT, I looked into how to distribute just cat memes
randomly on the Internet, but also provide features that would help
with building user interfaces and user experience that improve upon
the establishment such as twitter, facebook and even mastodon. Hence,
the idea of signed namespace, where only the person owning the private
key can set and update values.

Then, entered the wonderful world of cryptographic signatures.

...

PSA: I got tired. I prefer to code.
